

Numeral Systems

Is a writing system that expresses numbers using digits, symbols, characters with a of set of rules to express such number. The number represented by the numeral system is called its value. Earlier number systems didn’t developed a positional notation.

The most used system of numerals is the decimal in which Indians mathematicians are credited for its creation.  

The roman numeral is a base 10 numeral system originated in ancient rome between 9th and 8th century BC. It was created out of the need to improve counting after 10. Its use is more accredited to general day to day practices such as trade and commerce. In this period it is highly unlikely the romans needed big numbers for the economy they ran centuries ago, unlike present day productivity, purchase amount and the economy overall worldwide. This number system has lasted more than the roman empire itself. It’s currently used in books enumerating chapters, on clocks, movies titles or any other area where a classic style of number is needed.

This numeral system lacked of a representation of the number zero which brough to it a faulty numeral system and a wall between progress for improvements on scientific areas such as math, geometry, etc. This may have been due to the little or no use of the number zero on trades that the romans conducted on that period.   However, this issue didn’t hinge the engineering developments of one of the greatest empires for that time and the concept of nothing (zero) did exist between roman but as stated above there was no practical use for it in that time. The roman numerals are represented by a combination of  seven latin letters in which each one has a specific value. I = 1, V = 5, X = 10, L = 50, C = 100, D = 500, M = 1000.  

	Thousands	Hundreds	Tens	Units
	M	C	X	I
	MM	CC	XX	II
	MMM	CCC	XXX	III
		CD	XL	IV
		D	L	V
		DC	LX	VI
		DCC	LXX	VII
		DCCC	LXXX	VIII
		CM	XC	IX

It is well believed that they choose these latin letters for a reason. The I resembles a finger which represent one, the V resembles the whole hand in which the thumb and the rest of the finger could look like a V representing five, and X which resembles two hands since there are two V (could be looked like one regular V and another upside-down V)
With this table we can conclude the largest number that can be represented by the roman numeral 3999 = MMMCMXCIX in the traditional roman numeral system. Nevertheless, in order to get around this cap the romans overcome this issue with a vinculum. A vinculum is a horizontal line placed above or below a value to show some purpose, such as repeting decimals or digit. The vinculum represents a multiple of 1000. Example: XXXVII = 37 multiplied by 1000 = 37,000, or XL IV = 40 multiplied by 1000 added by 4 = 40004. There is a principle which says a letter can’t be repeated 4 times.

In terms of fractions the romans decided to go with a duodecimal system rather than their current decimal system. A duodecimal system use the number 12 which is the smallest number with four non-trivial factors(2,3,4,6) making its divisibility greater than most systems. This makes the duodecimal system a much optimal system than the decimal system. Each 12th were called an uncia and fraction less than 6/12 = ½ was represented by a dot, ½ was represent by an S, and fractions greater than a ½ are represented by adding dots to the S letter.

Current use of roman numerals varies, it is used in astronomy to represent a planet’s satellite. For example the moon could be designated as Earth I. In chemistry the numerals are used to denote groups of the periodic table, name phases of polymorphic crystals. In education, year grades are sometimes represented in roman numeral; for example,  grade XII as a replace of grade 12, in graphic design is used a stylish number system, in law it is used to separate legal codes for example the US constitution, in mathematics it is used to represent the quadrants in the cartesian plane, in military is used to distinguish between units at different levels, in music is used in movements and the representation of string instruments, in photography is used to determine the brightness level using zone system, in seismology is used to indicate a degree of the Mercalli intensity scale of earthquakes, in tarot they are used to denote cards of the major arcana.  

